Add Usage Documentation for Immutable Backup Buckets (#12175)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/advanced/immutable-backup-buckets.md

Reviewer: Please add reference in `README.md` index.

Author: Added as part of https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/12175/commits/173151797362e67ac578362de4e5c8440cdd8e56

---

# Immutable Backup Buckets

## Overview

**Immutable backup buckets** ensure that etcd backups cannot be modified or deleted before the configured retention period expires, by leveraging immutability features provided by supported cloud providers.

This capability is critical for:

* **Security**: Protecting against accidental or malicious deletion of backups.
* **Compliance**: Meeting regulatory requirements for data retention.
* **Operational integrity**: Ensuring recoverable state of your Kubernetes clusters.

> [!NOTE]
> For background, see [Gardener Issue #10866](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866).

## Core Concepts

When **immutability** is enabled via a supported Gardener provider extension:

The **provider extension** will:

* ✅ **Create** the backup bucket with the desired immutability policy (if it does not already exist).
* 🔄 **Reconcile** the policy on existing buckets to match the current configuration.
* 🚫 **Prevent changes** that would weaken the policy (reduce retention period or disable immutability).
* 🕑 **Manage deletion lifecycle**: If retention lock prevents immediate deletion of objects, a deletion policy will apply when allowed.

> > \[!IMPORTANT]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
```

---
title: Immutable Backup Buckets
---

# Immutable Backup Buckets

## Overview 

Immutable backup buckets ensure that etcd backups cannot be modified or deleted after creation, leveraging immutability features provided by supported cloud providers. This is essential for meeting security, compliance, and operational requirements.

> [!NOTE]
> For background, see [Gardener Issue #10866](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/issues/10866).

## Core Concepts

> Gardener supports immutable backup buckets for `AWS`, `GCP`, and `Azure` via their respective provider extensions. When enabled, the extension will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gardener provider extensions support immutable backup buckets for some hyperscalers, e.g., `AWS`, `GCP`, and `Azure`. When enabled, the extension will:
```

- **Create** buckets with the specified immutability policy if they do not exist.
- **Reconcile** existing buckets to enforce the desired immutability policy.

> - **Prevent** reducing the retention period or disabling immutability once the policy is locked.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Prevent** reducing the retention period or disabling immutability.
```
IMO, don't mention provider specific details as it's not applicable to aws. 
If you want to mention then you can add a line`for more details check provider specific extension doc`

> - **Apply** lifecycle-based delayed deletion on `GCP` and `Azure` when immediate deletion is not permitted.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Apply** lifecycle-based policy will be added when immediate deletion of objects is not permitted.
```
same as above: don't mention provider specific details.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Once immutability is locked, it cannot be disabled or shortened.

> 

Reviewer 3: should we mention about openstack as we already have mentioned this in backup-restore ?
```
> [!Note]
> Currently, Openstack object storage (swift) doesn't support immutability for objects: https://blueprints.launchpad.net/swift/+spec/immutability-middleware.
```

Reviewer: The current state is already somewhat problematic, as we want to avoid including provider-specific details in this repository. Some resource examples in the documentation might be acceptable for usability purposes. Thus, I would suggest moving statements like this to the OpenStack provider extension. Once Swift supports immutability, the extension repository can be updated with the necessary code and documentation changes.

Reviewer 3: ok, make sense

### `AWS`

```yaml
apiVersion: aws.provider.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: BackupBucketConfig
metadata:
  name: example-immutable-backup
immutability:
  retentionType: bucket  # Enable S3 Object Lock on bucket
  retentionPeriod: 96h  # Backups are immutable for 4 days
  mode: compliance     # or governance
```

> [!NOTE]
> `AWS` S3 Object Lock in **COMPLIANCE** mode cannot be overridden by any user, including the bucket owner. See [`AWS` Extension Usage – BackupBucket](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-aws/blob/master/docs/usage/usage.md#backupbucket)

### Azure

```yaml
apiVersion: azure.provider.extensions.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: BackupBucketConfig
metadata:
  name: example-immutable-backup
immutability:
  retentionPeriod: 96h        # Backups are immutable for 4 days
  retentionType: bucket       # Container-level immutability
  locked: true                # Once enabled, policy is irreversible
```

> [!NOTE]
> `Azure` uses container immutability policies with delayed deletion. Once `locked: true` is set, the policy cannot be changed or removed.  

> > See [`Azure` Extension Usage – BackupBucket](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-azure/blob/master/docs/usage/usage.md#backupbucket)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> See [`Azure` Extension Usage – BackupBucket](https://github.com/gardener/gardener-extension-provider-azure/blob/master/docs/usage/usage.md#backupbucketconfig)
```
